Review SAM 2 : final version of post (#181)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2024-08-26-SAM2.md

&nbsp;

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/SAM2/task_example.jpg" width=1500></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 1. Example of interactive task with SAM 2.</p>

&nbsp;

As in SAM original paper, the work of the authors is composed of two main parts:
* A model, SAM 2, which produces segmentation masks of the object of interest both in single images (as SAM) and across video frames.
* A dataset, built with a data engine comparable to SAM's, that is with back-and-forth iterations between automatic models and manual annotators. The final Segmentation Anything Video (SA-V) dataset contains 35.5 millions masks across 50.9K videos, which is around 50 times more than any existing video segmentation dataset.

Both aspects will be presented in the next sections.

&nbsp;

# Segment Anything Model 2

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/SAM2/sam2_overview.jpg" width=1500></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 2. Overview of SAM 2.</p>

> SAM 2 is broadly similar to SAM with two major changes : a different, more recent and powerful image encoder, and a *memory mechanism* for ensuring consistency between segmented masks across frames. As a reminder, SAM is composed of an ViT image encoder, a prompt encoder and a lightweight decoder for producing the output masks. A consequence of such an asymetric model is that encoding an input image is rather long, but adjusting the prompts is then very fast. This property is also found in SAM 2. Figure 2 details all the components of the model.

Reviewer: Wording:
```suggestion
SAM 2 is broadly similar to SAM with two major changes: a more recent and powerful image encoder, and a *memory mechanism* for ensuring consistency between segmented masks across frames. As a reminder, SAM is composed of a ViT image encoder, a prompt encoder and a lightweight decoder for producing the output masks. A consequence of such an asymetric model is that encoding an input image is relatively long, but adjusting to different prompts is then very fast. This property is also found in SAM 2. Figure 2 details all the components of the model.
```

&nbsp;

## Image encoder

> They authors used a **Hiera**[^1], a recent hierarchical vision transformer using only standard ViT blocks and global attention (except for the first two stages) and designed to be more efficient than windowed SwinViT or MViT. The image encoder is pretrained with Masked Auto-Encoder procedure. The final frame embeddings are obtained by fusing the features from stages 3 and 4 of the Hira image encoder. Contrary to SAM, **intermediate stage features are also kept** and later added to the upsampling layers in the mask decoder to help producing high-resolution segmentation details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They authors used a **Hiera**[^1], a recent hierarchical vision transformer using only standard ViT blocks and global attention (except for the first two stages) and designed to be more efficient than windowed SwinViT or MViT. The image encoder is pretrained with Masked Auto-Encoder procedure. The final frame embeddings are obtained by fusing the features from stages 3 and 4 of the Hiera image encoder. Contrary to SAM, **intermediate stage features are also kept** and later added to the upsampling layers in the mask decoder to help produce high-resolution segmentation details.
```

The image encoder is run only once over all the images to produce *unconditioned image tokens* representing each frame.

&nbsp;

## Memory attention

> The role of memory attention is to **condition frame features on the past feature frames and predictions** as well as on any new prompts. It is composed of several transformer blocks in which there is self-attention between the image embeddings of the current frame, and cross-attention to tokens of the objects in the memory bank, that is prompted or unprompted frames and objets pointers (see relevant section for further details).

Reviewer: Phrasing for clarity:
```suggestion
The role of memory attention is to **condition frame features on the past feature frames and predictions** as well as on any new prompts. It is composed of several transformer blocks in which there is self-attention between the image embeddings of the current frame, and cross-attention to tokens of the objects in the memory bank, meaning prompted or unprompted frames and objets pointers (see relevant section for further details).
```

&nbsp;

## Prompt encoder

Prompt encoders are similar to SAM's : sparse prompts, *i.e.* points and bounding boxes, are represented by positional encodings summed with learnt embeddings for each prompt type and dense prompts, *i.e.* masks, are embedded using (downsampling) convolutions and summed with the conditioned frame embeddings.

&nbsp;

## Mask decoder

> The decoder architecture is again quite similar to that of SAM. It takes as input the conditioned frame embeddings (with potential mask encoded embeddings) on one hand, and sparse prompts tokens, concatenated with tokens used for the output, on the other hand. The decoder stacks transformer blocks with self-attention between prompt+ouput tokens and alternated "image to token" and "token to image" cross-attention.

Reviewer: The last sentence of this paragraph (about the stack of transformer blocks in the decoder) is confusing to me. I feel like there's too much info in it, so maybe try splitting into a few simpler descriptions?

Author: see latest commit

> The decoder architecture is again quite similar to that of SAM. It takes as input the conditioned frame embeddings (with potential mask encoded embeddings) on one hand, and sparse prompts tokens, concatenated with tokens used for the output, on the other hand. The decoder is composed of two main blocks : a transformer block of self-attention between prompt+ouput tokens and a transformer block of cross attention transformer between image tokens and prompt+output tokens (called "image to token" attention).

Author: In fact, the first self-attention block is also included in the "alternance of blocks" (see schema), so i rephrased the paragraph so that it is (I hope) more clear. Tell me if it's ok this time

> The decoder architecture is again quite similar to that of SAM. It takes as input the conditioned frame embeddings (with potential mask encoded embeddings) on one hand, and sparse prompts tokens, concatenated with tokens used for the output, on the other hand. The decoder is composed of two main blocks : a transformer block of self-attention between prompt+ouput tokens and a transformer block of cross attention transformer between image tokens and prompt+output tokens (called "image to token" attention).

Reviewer: I had understood thanks to your figure, but I think I dit not formulate things ideally myself. I like your last suggestion the best :+1:

> N.B: X to Y attention means that X is query and Y is key and value in the attention layer.

> The model produces multiple from the resulting tokens : 

Reviewer: Missing word?
```suggestion
The model produces multiple outputs from the resulting tokens:
```

* The tokens are upsampled with convolutions and summed with stages 1 and 2 frame features from Hiera image encoder. They are multiplied with the output tokens (after passing through 3 MLP layers) to produce **low-resolution masks** (at a resolution 4x lower than input image).

> *  The output tokens is also used to produce what are called **object pointers**, which are lightweight vectors to encode high-level semantic information of the objecct to segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The output tokens are also used to produce what are called **object pointers**, which are lightweight vectors to encode high-level semantic information of the object to segment.
```

*  As in SAM, there could be ambiguity on the mask to predict, as an object can have several subparts that are also segmented. For this reason, the model produces multiple output masks (3 in general) and predicts the **IoU scores** between the ground truth and each mask.

> *  Finally, a specific constraint of video segmentation is that objects of interest can disappear from the image, momentarily or permanently. Hence, SAM 2 also predicts an **oclusion score** for each object.

Reviewer: Wording + grammar:
```suggestion
* Finally, a specific challenge of video segmentation is that objects of interest can disappear from the image, momentarily or permanently. Hence, SAM 2 also predicts an **occlusion score** for each object.
```

From these outputs, few post-processing steps, including resolving mask covering (based on the predicted IoU), mask refinement and a final 4x upsampling, allow to produce the final segmentation map at the original image size.

&nbsp;

> ## Memory bank

Reviewer: If I understand the paper correctly, there are 2 FIFO queues: one of the _N_ most recent frames, and one of the _M_ most recent prompted frames. So I would try to rework the paragraph below to make this clear.

Author: see latest commit

> The memory bank contains all the information to condition the frame embedding on the past predictions. It is composed of a FIFO queue of memories of prompted frames and unprompted frames for sptial features. Depending on the task and the input prompts, there might be one or multiple prompted frames. For instance, in semi supervised Video Object Segmentation, the video begins with a mask that must be tracked thoughout the video. In that case, only the first frame in prompted and the rest of the sptial memory is composed of unconditioned frame features. In addition to those spatial feature memories, the model also store a list of object pointers, already described in the previous section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory bank contains all the information to condition the frame embedding on the past predictions. It is composed of a FIFO queue of memories of prompted frames and unprompted frames for spatial features. Depending on the task and the input prompts, there might be one or multiple prompted frames. For instance, in semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation, the video begins with a mask that must be tracked throughout the video. In this case, only the first frame is prompted and the rest of the spatial memory is composed of unconditioned frame features. In addition to those spatial feature memories, the model also stores a list of object pointers, already described in the previous section.
```

&nbsp;

# Data

> The second main work of the authors is a large-scale database of annotated video. They proceded in three steps, with interactions between interactive models and human annotators to obtain their final SA-V dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second main work of the authors is a large-scale database of annotated video. They proceeded in three steps, with interactions between interactive models and human annotators to obtain their final SA-V dataset. 
```

> **Phase 1.** They first used SAM to annotate target objects in 6 FPS (frame per second) videos. For that, pixel-level SAM masks were manually edited with brush and eraser tools. The lack of temporal consistency in SAM's predictions consequently obliged annotators to often refine masks. During this first stage, they collected 16k masklets across 1.4 videos at an average annotation speed was of 37.8 seconds per frame.

Reviewer: Phrasing + missing number of videos:
```suggestion
**Phase 1.** They first used SAM to annotate target objects in 6 FPS (frame per second) videos. For that, pixel-level SAM masks were manually edited with brush and eraser tools. The lack of temporal consistency in SAM's predictions consequently forced annotators to refine masks often. During this first stage, they collected 16k masklets across 1.4K videos, at an average annotation speed of 37.8 seconds per frame.
```

> **Phase 2.** During this phase, a SAM 2 model accepting only masks was trained on the annotations from the previous stage and publicly available datasets. Then, the annotators used SAM and brush/erase tools to generate spatial masks in the first frame on each video and propagates them temporally using SAM 2. At any frame of the video, the annotators can modify the predicted mask and re-propagate it with SAM 2, repeating this process until the masklet is correct. During this second stage, they collected 63.5 masklets masklets at an average annotation speed was of 7.4 seconds per frame.

Reviewer: Fixed number of masklets:
```suggestion
**Phase 2.** During this phase, a SAM 2 model accepting only masks was trained on the annotations from the previous stage and publicly available datasets. Then, the annotators used SAM and brush/erase tools to generate spatial masks in the first frame on each video and propagates them temporally using SAM 2. At any frame of the video, the annotators can modify the predicted mask and re-propagate it with SAM 2, repeating this process until the masklet is correct. During this second stage, they collected 63.5K masklets, at an average annotation speed of 7.4 seconds per frame.
```

> **Phase 3.** They authors trained another SAM 2 model, this time accepting masks, points and boundings boxes as prompt, and used it as automatic video segmentor. The annotators only needed to provide occasional refinement clicks to edit the predicted masklets, lowering the average annotation speed to 4.5 seconds per frame. They collected 197K masklets during this stage.

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
**Phase 3.** They authors trained another SAM 2 model, this time accepting masks, points and boundings boxes as prompts, and used it as automatic video segmentor. The annotators only needed to provide occasional refinement clicks to edit the predicted masklets, lowering the average annotation time to 4.5 seconds per frame. They collected 197K masklets during this stage.
```

> The final SA-V dataset comprised 50.9K videos cpatured by crowdworkers from 47 countries. The annotations contains 190.9K manual masklets and 451.7K automatic masklets. A subpart of SA-V dataset with only manual annotations and challenging tagets is kept for the evaluation.

Reviewer: Typos:
```suggestion
The final SA-V dataset comprised 50.9K videos captured by crowdworkers from 47 countries. The annotations contains 190.9K manual masklets and 451.7K automatic masklets. A subset of SA-V dataset with only manual annotations and challenging targets is kept for the evaluation.
```

&nbsp;

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/SAM2/sam2_examples.jpg" width=1500></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 3. Examples of predicted masklets of SAM 2.</p>

&nbsp;

# Evaluation

SAM 2 is compared to other state-of-the-art models on multiple zero-shot video and image tasks.

&nbsp;

## Promptable video segmentation

> They first simulated a realistic user experience for promptable video segmentation. Two settings are consiered : an *offline* evaluation, where multiple passes are made through a video to select frames to interact based on the largest model error, and an *online* evaluation, where the frames are annotated in a single farwork pass though the video.

Reviewer: Typos + missing word:
```suggestion
They first simulated a realistic user experience for promptable video segmentation. Two settings are considered : an *offline* evaluation, where multiple passes are made through a video to select frames to interact with based on the largest model error, and an *online* evaluation, where the frames are annotated in a single forward pass though the video.
```

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/SAM2/promptable_video_segmentation.jpg" width=1500></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 3. Performance on promtable video segmentation task. Metric is J&F.</p>

&nbsp;

## Semi-supervised video object segmentation

A second task of interest is semi-supervised video object segmentation task, where only the frist frame of the video is provided a prompt and the target object must be segmented and tracked throughout the video. 

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/SAM2/semi_supervised_video_object_segmentation.jpg" width=600></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 4. Performance on semi-supervised video object segmentation task. Metric is J&F.</p>

&nbsp;

## Zero-shot image segmentation

> Even though it is made for video segmentation, the authors also evaluate SAM 2 on image segemtation datasets. The evaluation is done on 37 zero-shot datasets, including the 23 datasets used in SAM paper. The model benefits from improved image encoder and mask decoder architecture to surpass SAM. 

Reviewer: Missing words:
```suggestion
Even though it is made for video segmentation, the authors also evaluate SAM 2 on image segemtation datasets. The evaluation is done on 37 zero-shot datasets, including the 23 datasets used in the SAM paper. The model benefits from the improved image encoder and mask decoder architectures to surpass SAM. 
```

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/SAM2/image_task.jpg" width=600></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 5. Performance on zero-shot image segmentation task.</p>

&nbsp;

## Standard VOS task

> SAM 2 is also evaluated on non-interactive, more standard, video object segmentation task, where the prompt is a ground-truth mask on the first frame, an the object must be tracked across the video.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SAM 2 is also evaluated on a non-interactive, more standard, video object segmentation task, where the prompt is a ground-truth mask on the first frame, an the object must be tracked across the video.
```

<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="/collections/images/SAM2/standard_vos.jpg" width=1500></div>
<p style="text-align: center;font-style:italic">Figure 6. Comparison to prior work onn video object segmentation.</p>

&nbsp;

# Conclusion

> SAM 2 is a foundation model for promptable video segmentation. Built upon SAM, it includes several design improvments and add to achieve state-of-the-art performance on many zero-shot image and video segmentation tasks. The full paper includes more details about the model and experiments, including several ablation studies on the components of the model and the dataset as well as a fairness evaluation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SAM 2 is a foundation model for promptable video segmentation. Built upon SAM, it includes several design improvements and additions to achieve state-of-the-art performance on many zero-shot image and video segmentation tasks. The full paper includes more details about the model and experiments, including several ablation studies on the components of the model and the dataset as well as a fairness evaluation.
```
